Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station: thiopental.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Let us discuss thiopental. Begin by telling me what it is and where it sits among
anaesthetic drugs.
Thiopental, also called thiopentone,
is an ultra-short-acting intravenous induction agent of the barbiturate class —
specifically a thiobarbiturate, in which the oxygen at the second carbon of the
barbituric acid ring is replaced by sulphur,
which increases lipid solubility and speeds onset.
It was for decades the standard agent for intravenous induction and for
rapid-sequence induction, and although propofol has largely displaced it from
routine practice, it remains important:
it is the barbiturate that has survived in anaesthesia,
and it retains specific roles in the control of refractory status epilepticus and
raised intracranial pressure.
It is a useful drug to understand thoroughly because its pharmacology contrasts so
instructively with that of propofol.
Describe its structure and how it is presented for use.
Thiopental is the sodium salt of a thiobarbiturate, derived from barbituric acid,
which is itself the condensation product of malonic acid and urea.
It is supplied as a pale yellow, hygroscopic powder,
mixed with anhydrous sodium carbonate and packaged under nitrogen,
because it is unstable in the presence of air and water.
It is reconstituted with water to make a two-and-a-half per cent solution.
The sodium carbonate makes the solution strongly alkaline,
with a pH of around ten-and-a-half, which keeps the drug in its water-soluble,
ionised form and prevents precipitation of the free acid.
The reconstituted solution is stable for only a day or two.
It exists as a tautomeric mixture, and the keto-enol tautomerism,
with the lipid-soluble form predominating at body pH,
is part of what gives it rapid central access.
That high pH has practical consequences. What are they?
The strong alkalinity means thiopental is incompatible with acidic drugs and with
many others in the same line: mixing it with suxamethonium,
or with acidic agents such as some opioids and vecuronium,
causes precipitation that can block the cannula,
which is why it must be flushed thoroughly between drugs.
The alkalinity is also relevant to the danger of accidental intra-arterial or
extravascular injection, which I will come to.
And because only the un-ionised fraction crosses membranes,
the depth of anaesthesia and the free drug available are sensitive to changes in
blood pH — acidosis increases the un-ionised,
active fraction and can deepen the effect.
What is its mechanism of action?
Thiopental acts principally at the gamma-aminobutyric acid type A receptor,
the GABA-A receptor, the major inhibitory ligand-gated chloride channel of the
central nervous system.
It binds at the barbiturate site, distinct from the benzodiazepine site,
and potentiates the inhibitory action of GABA.
The important mechanistic distinction from the benzodiazepines is that barbiturates
increase the duration of chloride-channel opening,
whereas benzodiazepines increase the frequency of opening.
Furthermore, at higher concentrations barbiturates can open the channel directly,
independent of GABA — which is why they have no ceiling to their central depression
and are far more dangerous in overdose than the benzodiazepines,
which depend on the presence of GABA.
Why is its onset of action so rapid?
Because it is highly lipid-soluble and largely un-ionised at physiological pH,
so a large fraction crosses the blood-brain barrier almost immediately.
After an intravenous bolus, the brain concentration rises within one arm-to-brain
circulation time, and loss of consciousness occurs in around thirty seconds,
smoothly and without the excitatory phenomena sometimes seen with other agents.
The brain receives a high proportion of the cardiac output and equilibrates rapidly
with the arterial concentration, so the effect-site concentration follows the
plasma concentration closely.
And why does a single dose wear off so quickly, given that it is slowly metabolised?
Recovery from a single induction dose is by redistribution, not elimination.
After the bolus, the drug moves rapidly from the central compartment — blood and
the vessel-rich brain — into the larger, well-perfused lean tissues such as muscle,
down its concentration gradient.
The brain concentration therefore falls within a few minutes and the patient wakes,
even though almost all the drug is still in the body.
Elimination by hepatic metabolism is comparatively slow.
This redistribution-dependent recovery is the same principle as for propofol,
but it has a sting in the tail with thiopental,
because its metabolism is so slow that repeated doses or an infusion saturate the
peripheral compartments and produce marked accumulation.
Tell me more about its metabolism and the problem of accumulation.
Thiopental is metabolised almost entirely in the liver by oxidation to inactive,
water-soluble metabolites excreted in the urine;
only a tiny fraction is excreted unchanged.
The hepatic extraction ratio is low, so it is a capacity-limited drug.
Its elimination half-life is long — of the order of eleven to twelve hours,
and longer still in the elderly and in pregnancy.
Crucially, at the high plasma concentrations produced by large or repeated doses,
the metabolism becomes saturated and follows zero-order kinetics,
so the clearance falls and the drug accumulates disproportionately.
The consequence is that its context-sensitive half-time rises steeply with infusion
duration, and a prolonged hangover follows repeated dosing.
This is precisely why thiopental is unsuitable for maintenance of anaesthesia by
infusion, in sharp contrast to propofol.
Describe its effects on the central nervous system.
Thiopental produces dose-dependent depression of the central nervous system,
from sedation to unconsciousness.
It reduces the cerebral metabolic rate for oxygen,
and through preserved flow-metabolism coupling it reduces cerebral blood flow,
cerebral blood volume and intracranial pressure.
This combination — a fall in metabolic demand and in intracranial pressure —
underlies its use in neuroanaesthesia and in the management of raised intracranial
pressure.
At deep levels it produces burst suppression and eventually an isoelectric
electroencephalogram, the point of maximal metabolic suppression.
It is also a potent anticonvulsant.
Unlike methohexital, it does not lower the seizure threshold;
indeed thiopental is used to terminate seizures.
You mention seizures. What is its role in status epilepticus?
Thiopental is one of the anaesthetic agents used to induce a therapeutic coma in
refractory status epilepticus — that is,
status that has failed to respond to first-line benzodiazepines and second-line
anticonvulsants.
In the international treatment algorithms it sits at the third stage,
alongside midazolam and propofol infusions,
where the aim is to titrate to electroencephalographic burst suppression and
control seizure activity in the intensive care unit.
Its drawbacks in that role are its accumulation and very prolonged recovery,
cardiovascular depression, and immunosuppression with prolonged use,
so it is often not the first of the anaesthetic agents chosen,
but it remains an established option for the most resistant cases.
Now the cardiovascular effects.
Thiopental causes a fall in arterial blood pressure,
principally through venodilation, which reduces venous return and cardiac preload,
together with a degree of direct myocardial depression and reduced sympathetic
outflow.
Importantly, and in contrast to propofol,
the baroreceptor reflex is largely preserved,
so a compensatory tachycardia usually occurs,
which helps to maintain cardiac output in the fit patient but increases myocardial
oxygen demand — a disadvantage in coronary disease.
The hypotension is exaggerated and potentially dangerous in the hypovolaemic,
the elderly, and those with limited cardiac reserve,
in whom an unmodified induction dose can precipitate profound cardiovascular
collapse, so the dose must be reduced and given slowly.
And the respiratory effects?
Thiopental is a respiratory depressant and an induction dose typically produces a
period of apnoea, preceded by a fall in tidal volume and rate.
It depresses the ventilatory responses to carbon dioxide and hypoxia.
Unlike propofol it does not obtund airway reflexes well,
and indeed laryngeal and bronchial reflexes may remain brisk,
so instrumentation of the airway under light thiopental anaesthesia can provoke
laryngospasm or bronchospasm.
It can also cause histamine release,
and it is best avoided as the sole induction agent in the asthmatic,
where propofol or ketamine is preferred.
Give me the induction dose and how you would adjust it.
The usual induction dose in a fit adult is three to five milligrams per kilogram,
titrated to loss of the eyelash reflex. In rapid-sequence induction a defined dose
was traditionally given as part of a fixed sequence.
The dose must be reduced substantially — often halved or more — in the elderly,
the hypovolaemic, the shocked and those with low cardiac output,
both because of altered pharmacokinetics and because of heightened sensitivity and
exaggerated hypotension.
In pregnancy the dose is also reduced. It is given slowly and titrated,
never as a rapid fixed bolus in the compromised patient.
What are the indications for thiopental today?
Its routine role in induction has largely been taken over by propofol,
but it retains a place in several settings: rapid-sequence induction,
where its rapid, smooth, reliable onset and long track record are valued,
and where in some institutions it remains the agent of choice;
the control of refractory status epilepticus;
the reduction of intracranial pressure and provision of cerebral protection during
periods of focal ischaemia in neurosurgery; and historically,
induction at caesarean section.
It is no longer used for maintenance because of accumulation.
A serious hazard is accidental intra-arterial injection.
Describe what happens and how you would manage it.
Accidental intra-arterial injection of thiopental is a recognised emergency.
The strongly alkaline solution causes intense pain,
and crystallisation of the drug in the small arteries together with the release of
vasoconstrictor mediators produces severe arterial spasm and thrombosis,
which can lead to ischaemia, tissue necrosis and even gangrene of the limb.
Management is immediate: stop injecting but leave the cannula in the artery to give
treatment through it; dilute by injecting saline;
relieve the spasm and pain with an intra-arterial vasodilator such as papaverine,
and provide analgesia; perform a regional sympathetic block,
such as a stellate ganglion or brachial plexus block, to produce vasodilation;
anticoagulate with heparin to prevent thrombosis; and elevate the limb.
Early recognition and treatment are essential to save the limb.
Using a lower concentration and a large vein reduces the risk.
And extravascular injection or extravasation?
Because the solution is so alkaline it is irritant to tissues,
so extravasation causes pain and can produce local tissue damage and,
in severe cases, necrosis.
Management is to stop the injection,
and to dilute and disperse the drug — infiltration of the area with saline,
sometimes with hyaluronidase to aid dispersion,
and with a local anaesthetic for pain.
Using a more dilute solution and confirming intravenous placement before injecting
reduce the risk.
There is an absolute contraindication you must know. What is it, and why?
The absolute contraindication is the porphyrias,
particularly the acute intermittent and variegate porphyrias.
Barbiturates are potent inducers of the enzyme delta-aminolaevulinic acid synthase,
the rate-limiting enzyme of haem synthesis.
In a susceptible patient this induction increases the production of the porphyrin
precursors that accumulate in these conditions,
and can precipitate a life-threatening acute porphyric crisis — with severe
abdominal pain, autonomic instability,
neuropsychiatric disturbance and potentially fatal paralysis.
Thiopental is therefore absolutely contraindicated in the porphyrias,
and propofol is the safe alternative for induction.
What other contraindications and cautions apply?
Beyond porphyria, true barbiturate hypersensitivity is an absolute contraindication.
Relative contraindications and major cautions include hypovolaemia and shock,
fixed cardiac output states such as severe aortic stenosis or cardiac tamponade,
and severe cardiovascular disease, in all of which the cardiovascular depression is
dangerous; airway obstruction or difficult airway,
given the brisk reflexes and apnoea; and severe hepatic impairment,
which prolongs its action.
It should be used with great care, and at much reduced dose, in the elderly.
Can it cause allergic reactions?
Yes. Thiopental can cause histamine release, producing a rash,
bronchospasm and hypotension, and true anaphylaxis to barbiturates, though rare,
is recognised and can be severe.
The frequency of serious hypersensitivity is low but real,
and it is part of why agents that cause less histamine release are often preferred
in the atopic or asthmatic patient.
Any suspected anaphylaxis is managed along the standard lines,
with later allergy testing and clear documentation.
Compare thiopental with propofol, and explain why propofol displaced it.
Both are rapidly acting hypnotics whose single-dose recovery is by redistribution,
but they differ in ways that favoured propofol for routine use.
Propofol gives a clearer, more pleasant recovery with antiemetic properties,
whereas thiopental has a more prolonged hangover and no antiemetic effect,
with some nausea.
Propofol's context-sensitive half-time is relatively flat,
allowing it to be used for maintenance by infusion,
whereas thiopental accumulates and cannot. Propofol better suppresses airway
reflexes, suiting laryngeal mask insertion.
Thiopental retains advantages: preservation of the baroreflex with a compensatory
tachycardia, anticonvulsant action, and a long,
reassuring track record in rapid-sequence induction.
So propofol won routine practice on recovery quality and versatility,
while thiopental kept its niches.
For the shocked or haemodynamically unstable patient,
how does thiopental compare with etomidate and ketamine?
In the unstable patient thiopental is a poor choice,
because its venodilation and myocardial depression can precipitate collapse,
and the preserved reflex tachycardia does not compensate when the patient is
already maximally sympathetically driven.
Etomidate offers the greatest cardiovascular stability at induction,
at the cost of adrenocortical suppression. Ketamine provides cardiovascular support
through sympathetic stimulation and is often preferred in trauma and shock.
So for the haemodynamically fragile patient I would reduce or avoid thiopental and
choose ketamine or etomidate, reserving thiopental for the cardiovascularly stable
patient.
How does thiopental differ from methohexital?
Methohexital is an oxybarbiturate — an oxygen rather than sulphur substitution —
and a methylated barbiturate.
It is more potent and shorter-acting than thiopental, with a faster recovery,
which made it popular for brief procedures such as electroconvulsive therapy,
where it also gives less seizure shortening than propofol.
However, methohexital lowers the seizure threshold and can cause excitatory
phenomena such as myoclonus and hiccups on induction, and pain on injection.
Thiopental, by contrast, is anticonvulsant.
They share the barbiturate hazards, including the porphyria contraindication.
What does the evidence say about thiopental for cerebral protection after cardiac
arrest?
Although thiopental reduces cerebral metabolic rate and was once hoped to protect
the brain after global ischaemia, the randomised evidence — notably the brain
resuscitation clinical trials of barbiturate therapy after cardiac arrest — did not
show an improvement in neurological outcome,
and the cardiovascular depression was a real harm.
So barbiturate coma is not recommended as a routine neuroprotective measure after
cardiac arrest.
Its place is in focal, anticipated ischaemia during neurosurgery,
and in refractory status epilepticus and refractory raised intracranial pressure,
where the rationale is metabolic suppression and seizure or pressure control rather
than a general neuroprotective claim.
Outline its use as a barbiturate coma for refractory raised intracranial pressure.
When intracranial pressure remains dangerously high despite first-tier measures —
positioning, sedation, osmotherapy,
controlled ventilation and cerebrospinal fluid drainage — a thiopental infusion
titrated to electroencephalographic burst suppression is one of the tier-three
options to reduce cerebral metabolic rate and intracranial pressure.
It is used in the neurocritical-care setting with continuous
electroencephalographic and haemodynamic monitoring.
The costs are significant: profound and prolonged cardiovascular depression often
requiring vasopressor support, immunosuppression and infection risk, ileus,
hypothermia, and a very prolonged recovery from the accumulated drug,
so it is reserved for refractory cases and used with care.
What drug interactions are relevant?
Pharmacodynamically, thiopental potentiates other central depressants — opioids,
benzodiazepines, volatile agents — increasing respiratory and cardiovascular
depression, so doses are reduced in combination.
Chronic barbiturate exposure induces hepatic enzymes,
accelerating the metabolism of other drugs,
though this is more relevant to long-term barbiturate therapy than to single
anaesthetic use.
Its alkalinity makes it physically incompatible in the line with acidic drugs and
with suxamethonium, causing precipitation. And conditions or drugs that reduce
protein binding or cause acidosis increase the free,
active fraction and deepen its effect.
A brief word on the wider, non-clinical associations of thiopental.
Thiopental has a place in public awareness beyond anaesthesia,
having been used as a component of lethal-injection protocols and, historically,
characterised as a so-called truth serum.
These associations, together with manufacturing decisions,
contributed to supply shortages of the drug in some countries,
which in turn accelerated the move to propofol for routine induction.
From a purely clinical standpoint these are context rather than pharmacology,
but they explain part of why a once-ubiquitous agent became comparatively scarce.
Pull it together: when, today, would you still reach for thiopental?
I would still consider thiopental for rapid-sequence induction in a
cardiovascularly stable patient, valuing its rapid, smooth,
reliable onset and long record — indeed in some departments it remains the
preferred rapid-sequence agent.
I would use it to control refractory status epilepticus and to reduce refractory
raised intracranial pressure as a titrated burst-suppression infusion in critical
care, and for cerebral protection during anticipated focal ischaemia in
neurosurgery.
I would avoid it in porphyria, in the shocked or haemodynamically fragile patient,
in significant airway concern, and for maintenance,
where its accumulation makes it unsuitable.
In short, it is a drug of specific,
well-defined niches rather than of routine practice.
Say more about the structure-activity relationship of the barbiturates.
The barbiturates are derived from barbituric acid,
formed from malonic acid and urea, which is itself inactive.
Hypnotic activity requires substitution at the fifth carbon;
the nature of those substituents determines potency and duration.
Replacing the oxygen at the second carbon with sulphur,
giving a thiobarbiturate such as thiopental,
increases lipid solubility and so speeds onset and shortens duration,
producing an ultra-short-acting agent.
Methylation of the nitrogen, as in methohexital,
also shortens action but introduces excitatory side-effects.
Increasing the length and branching of the side chains generally increases potency
up to a point, beyond which convulsant activity appears.
So the sulphur substitution is what makes thiopental rapidly acting,
while the oxybarbiturates such as phenobarbital are longer-acting anticonvulsants.
Is thiopental a single substance, and does stereochemistry matter?
Thiopental has a chiral centre and is presented as a racemic mixture of its two
enantiomers.
The S-enantiomer is somewhat more potent than the R-form, but unlike ketamine,
where the single enantiomer is marketed for a cleaner profile,
thiopental is used as the racemate and the stereochemistry is of more theoretical
than practical importance in its clinical use.
It is a reminder, though, that the convenient assumption of a single active species
is an approximation.
Give me the key pharmacokinetic figures — binding, ionisation, distribution.
Thiopental is highly protein-bound, of the order of eighty per cent,
predominantly to albumin, so hypoalbuminaemia or displacement increases the free,
active fraction.
Its pKa is about seven-and-a-half, close to physiological pH,
so a clinically important proportion is un-ionised and lipid-soluble at body pH —
and acidosis, by increasing the un-ionised fraction,
increases central uptake and deepens the effect.
Its initial volume of distribution is modest but its volume at steady state is
large because of sequestration in fat. These figures explain its rapid central
uptake, its sensitivity to acid-base status and albumin,
and its tendency to accumulate.
Does thiopental show acute tolerance?
Yes — thiopental exhibits acute tolerance, or tachyphylaxis,
whereby a given brain concentration produces less effect on later exposure during
the same anaesthetic.
This means that the relationship between dose and effect shifts during prolonged
administration, so that more drug is needed for the same depth,
compounding the accumulation problem.
Acute tolerance is one further reason,
alongside the steeply rising context-sensitive half-time,
that thiopental is poorly suited to maintenance by infusion.
What is its role in electroconvulsive therapy?
Thiopental can be used to induce anaesthesia for electroconvulsive therapy,
giving a smooth, rapid induction.
However, because it is anticonvulsant it tends to shorten the induced seizure,
and adequate seizure duration is part of the therapeutic effect,
so methohexital was traditionally preferred for its lesser effect on seizure
duration, and propofol shortens seizures more still.
Where thiopental is used, the dose is kept modest and the seizure monitored.
So it is usable but not ideal in that specific setting.
What is the effect on intra-ocular pressure?
Thiopental lowers intra-ocular pressure,
by reducing aqueous production and relaxing the extra-ocular muscles,
and it obtunds the rise in intra-ocular pressure that would otherwise accompany
induction.
This made it useful in ophthalmic anaesthesia and in the patient with a penetrating
eye injury, where a rise in pressure risks extrusion of intra-ocular contents —
though in that scenario the choice of muscle relaxant and the avoidance of coughing
matter at least as much.
Comment on placental transfer and use in obstetrics.
Thiopental crosses the placenta readily, being lipophilic and largely un-ionised,
but it is taken up by the fetal liver and diluted in the fetal circulation,
so that with a standard single induction dose the amount reaching the fetal brain
is limited and significant neonatal depression is uncommon.
It was for many years the standard agent for induction at caesarean section under
general anaesthesia, valued for its rapid,
reliable onset in rapid-sequence induction.
Larger or repeated doses do cross sufficiently to depress the neonate,
so the dose is kept controlled.
How does pregnancy alter its handling?
Pregnancy reduces the dose requirement:
increased progesterone enhances sensitivity to anaesthetic agents,
and the physiological changes of pregnancy — increased cardiac output speeding
delivery to the brain, reduced plasma protein raising the free fraction,
and a larger volume of distribution — all influence its kinetics.
The net effect is that induction is achieved with a somewhat reduced dose,
and the prolonged elimination half-life is longer still in pregnancy.
As always the dose is titrated to effect.
Explain the cerebral steal and inverse steal phenomena in relation to thiopental.
In an area of brain injury, vessels may already be maximally dilated and
unresponsive to carbon dioxide. A vasodilator can then divert blood away from the
injured, non-reactive region towards healthy, reactive tissue — cerebral steal.
Thiopental, by reducing cerebral metabolic rate and constricting vessels in
healthy, reactive brain, can do the opposite:
it diverts blood towards the ischaemic area where the vessels remain dilated — the
inverse steal, or Robin Hood, effect.
This redistribution towards compromised tissue is part of the rationale for
barbiturate use in focal cerebral ischaemia,
although the clinical benefit must always be weighed against the cardiovascular
cost.
In a thiopental coma in intensive care,
how is it monitored and what supportive issues arise?
A thiopental coma is titrated to the electroencephalogram,
with the target usually a burst-suppression pattern that indicates near-maximal
metabolic suppression; continuous electroencephalographic monitoring is therefore
essential.
Supportive issues are considerable:
profound cardiovascular depression frequently requiring fluids and vasopressors or
inotropes; immunosuppression and a raised risk of infection,
particularly pneumonia, with prolonged use; gastrointestinal stasis and ileus;
a tendency to hypothermia; and a very prolonged recovery once stopped,
because of the accumulated drug, which complicates neurological assessment.
These costs are why barbiturate coma is reserved for refractory cases.
There is a classic historical lesson about thiopental dosing in shock. What is it?
The lesson, often associated with casualties at Pearl Harbor,
is that giving a normal induction dose of thiopental to hypovolaemic,
shocked patients caused a number of deaths,
because in the under-filled patient with a contracted circulating volume the drug
reaches the brain in high concentration and its cardiovascular depression is
catastrophic.
The enduring teaching is that thiopental must be given in a markedly reduced dose,
slowly and titrated, in the hypovolaemic or shocked patient — or, better,
an agent such as ketamine chosen instead.
It crystallised the principle that the dose is for the patient's physiological
state, not their weight alone.
Why must thiopental be injected slowly and titrated?
Because there is a short lag between injection and peak brain effect — about a
circulation time — and the dose-response relationship is steep,
so giving the drug rapidly as a fixed bolus risks markedly overshooting the dose
needed and producing excessive cardiovascular and respiratory depression before the
effect of what has already been given is apparent.
Slow injection, watching for loss of the eyelash reflex,
allows the dose to be titrated to the individual's actual requirement,
which varies widely, and avoids the harm of a relative overdose.
This is the general principle of titrating any potent intravenous agent to effect.
Describe the recovery profile after thiopental.
After a single induction dose, recovery of consciousness is rapid, within minutes,
by redistribution.
However, because elimination is slow, a degree of residual sedation,
drowsiness and impaired psychomotor performance — a hangover — persists for some
hours, longer than after propofol and without propofol's clarity or antiemetic
benefit.
After repeated doses or an infusion the hangover is greatly prolonged because of
accumulation. This recovery profile, more than anything,
is why thiopental gave way to propofol for day-case and routine work,
where rapid clear-headed recovery is prized.
For refractory status epilepticus, how would you choose between thiopental,
midazolam and propofol?
All three are used to induce the anaesthetic coma at the third stage of refractory
status, titrated to seizure control or burst suppression.
The choice balances their profiles.
Midazolam infusion is often first because of its relative cardiovascular stability,
though tachyphylaxis develops. Propofol acts quickly and recovers cleanly but
carries the risk of propofol infusion syndrome at the high,
prolonged doses required, particularly in children.
Thiopental is a powerful anticonvulsant and reliably achieves burst suppression,
but accumulates enormously, depresses the cardiovascular system,
and is immunosuppressive, giving the most prolonged recovery.
So thiopental tends to be reserved for the most resistant cases,
with full organ support, rather than chosen first.
What interactions arise from barbiturate enzyme induction?
Chronic barbiturate exposure is a potent inducer of hepatic microsomal enzymes,
including the cytochrome P450 system and the enzymes of haem synthesis.
The consequence is accelerated metabolism of many co-administered drugs — warfarin,
oral anticoagulants, anticonvulsants,
oral contraceptives and others — reducing their effect,
and a hazard when the inducer is later withdrawn and their concentrations rise.
This induction is also the very mechanism by which barbiturates precipitate a
porphyric crisis, through induction of delta-aminolaevulinic acid synthase.
With single anaesthetic use the induction is not clinically established,
but it is central to the pharmacology of chronic barbiturate therapy and to the
porphyria contraindication.
There is no specific antidote to a barbiturate overdose. How is it managed?
Management is supportive, because there is no specific antagonist as there is for
opioids or benzodiazepines.
The priorities are airway protection, ventilation for respiratory depression,
and circulatory support with fluids and vasopressors for the hypotension caused by
venodilation and myocardial depression.
For the long-acting oxybarbiturate phenobarbital, which is a weak acid,
alkalinisation of the urine and, in severe cases,
haemodialysis or haemoperfusion enhance elimination;
these are less applicable to the highly protein-bound, lipophilic thiopental.
The absence of an antidote, and the lack of a ceiling to barbiturate-induced
central depression because they open the chloride channel directly,
are why barbiturate overdose was historically so lethal.
Does hypothermia interact with thiopental in cerebral protection?
Yes — both hypothermia and thiopental reduce the cerebral metabolic rate for
oxygen, and their effects are additive.
Hypothermia reduces metabolism of both electrical activity and basal cellular
function, whereas barbiturates reduce only the electrical,
activity-dependent component, which is why hypothermia can confer protection beyond
the isoelectric point at which barbiturates can do no more.
In settings of anticipated cerebral ischaemia the two may be combined,
although the cardiovascular and infective costs of deep hypothermia and prolonged
barbiturate coma must be weighed, and routine therapeutic hypothermia for general
neuroprotection has not borne out its early promise.
Why is thiopental presented as a two-and-a-half per cent solution rather than
stronger?
The concentration is chosen to balance effective induction against the consequences
of misplaced injection.
A more concentrated solution would deliver the dose in a smaller volume but would
cause far more severe tissue and arterial damage if injected extravascularly or
intra-arterially, given the drug's alkalinity.
The two-and-a-half per cent solution reduces, though does not abolish,
the harm of accidental intra-arterial injection.
Higher concentrations were associated with worse arterial injury,
which is why the standard dilution is used,
alongside the discipline of confirming intravenous placement and using a large vein.
Do tolerance and dependence occur with barbiturates?
With chronic use, yes. Tolerance develops through both enzyme induction,
a pharmacokinetic mechanism, and adaptive central changes,
a pharmacodynamic mechanism.
Physical dependence develops, and abrupt withdrawal after chronic use produces a
dangerous withdrawal syndrome with anxiety, tremor,
and potentially seizures and cardiovascular instability,
which can be life-threatening and must be managed by gradual reduction.
Barbiturates also carry abuse potential.
These properties belong to chronic therapeutic or recreational use rather than to
single anaesthetic administration, but they are part of the class pharmacology and
contributed to barbiturates being superseded by safer drugs in most settings.
How do hepatic and renal impairment affect thiopental dosing?
In hepatic impairment, metabolism is slowed and elimination prolonged,
and reduced albumin raises the free, active fraction,
so the dose should be reduced and the prolonged recovery anticipated.
In renal impairment, although thiopental itself is metabolised by the liver and
little is excreted unchanged, the reduced protein binding of uraemia and acidosis
increases the free fraction and central effect, again warranting dose reduction.
In both, increased sensitivity to central depressants compounds the kinetic
changes. The general rule is to reduce the dose and titrate slowly wherever organ
function or protein binding is compromised.
Tie the mechanism together: how does the duration-versus-frequency point explain
thiopental's safety profile relative to benzodiazepines?
Barbiturates and benzodiazepines both potentiate GABA at the GABA-A receptor,
but barbiturates prolong the duration of channel opening whereas benzodiazepines
increase the frequency.
Crucially, at higher concentrations barbiturates open the chloride channel
directly, independent of GABA, so their central depression has no ceiling and
increases without limit as the dose rises — hence respiratory and cardiovascular
failure in overdose and no antidote.
Benzodiazepines, by contrast, only enhance the action of existing GABA and cannot
open the channel alone, so their depression has a ceiling and they are far safer in
overdose, with a specific antagonist in flumazenil.
This single mechanistic difference explains the very different safety margins of
the two classes.
Describe, step by step, how you would induce a stable adult with thiopental.
After confirming consent, fasting, and a checked anaesthetic machine and suction,
I would attach full monitoring — pulse oximetry, electrocardiography,
non-invasive blood pressure and capnography — and secure reliable intravenous
access in a large vein, ideally the antecubital fossa.
I would pre-oxygenate to build an oxygen reserve.
I would draw up the freshly reconstituted two-and-a-half per cent solution and
inject it slowly, titrating to loss of the eyelash reflex,
typically over twenty to thirty seconds, watching the blood pressure and depth,
and flushing the line before and after to avoid precipitation with other drugs.
I would anticipate apnoea and be ready to support ventilation,
and anticipate a fall in blood pressure with a compensatory tachycardia.
I would have a vasopressor immediately available,
and I would not give a fixed bolus but the dose the individual patient actually
needs.
What clinical signs confirm adequate depth at induction?
The classical sign is loss of the eyelash reflex,
which corresponds well to loss of consciousness;
loss of verbal contact and of the response to a gentle command precede it.
I would look also for loss of the lid reflex,
central positioning of the eyes with loss of roving movements,
regular quiet respiration giving way to the apnoea expected after thiopental,
and the absence of response to airway manipulation when I proceed.
Loss of the eyelash reflex is the practical end-point to which I titrate the dose.
In a monitored setting, processed electroencephalographic indices can supplement
these clinical signs, though they are interpreted with care.
Thank you. A clear and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Thiopental is an ultra-short-acting thiobarbiturate;
recovery from a single dose is by redistribution, but slow,
saturable metabolism causes accumulation, so it is unsuitable for infusion.
Second, It potentiates GABA-A by prolonging chloride-channel opening and can open
the channel directly at high dose — hence no ceiling and danger in overdose,
unlike benzodiazepines.
Third, It reduces cerebral metabolic rate,
blood flow and intracranial pressure and is anticonvulsant — underpinning its use
in refractory status epilepticus and raised intracranial pressure.
Fourth, The baroreflex is preserved (compensatory tachycardia), unlike propofol;
but venodilation and myocardial depression make it dangerous in the shocked or
fragile patient.
Fifth, Absolute contraindication is porphyria (induces ALA synthase);
intra-arterial injection is a limb-threatening emergency requiring dilution,
vasodilatation, sympathetic block and heparin.
Thank you. That concludes the station.